It drives me crazy that nobody else
thinks about risk in this way. People
look at my life and they're like, "Well,
you're crazy. You're such a risk taker."
Well, at least I'm taking the risks that
I'm choosing because think of all the
people that like go out partying every
weekend and they get buzzed and they
drive home. And even sedendary people
who are like, "Well, I don't take risk.
I stay home and I play video games." No,
you're at a much higher risk of heart
disease. Like, they're taking all kinds
of risk that they're not actually
choosing to take and you're still going
to freaking die either way. So, you
might as well take smart, calculated
risks and do all the things that you
want to do and at least die happy when
you go. He's done it. Alice Honold has
made history again, scaling one of the
world's tallest skyscrapers. [music]
>> But the conclusion that a lot of people
have arrived at is that you don't
experience fear because when they look
at these two brain scans, your amydala
is lighting up less when you're shown
scary images. I I actually hate all the
brain stuff because people always put me
in this box. They're like, "Well, you're
different." And I'm like, "Well, not
really. Like, I'm a middle class
suburban kid. Nobody in my family is
athletic. I just after [music] 20 years
of climbing 5 days a week and being
really freaking scared, I respond
differently than an average person." And
there was tons of emotional turmoil
throughout it. Periods where you're just
like I'm trying so hard and I'm just
like not as good as I want to be. You
know, I was like living in a car. I had
like a couple hundred bucks a month for
10 years. Like that's challenging. But
you just can't master a craft overnight.
I guess that's what people don't see.
And so how do you create the conditions
to out persist other people? And then in
all your career, when is the moment
where you were most scared?
>> On an expedition to Antarctica. I kept
hoping that it's going to get better and
it just kept getting [music] worse. Like
I could die.
>> Do you have a conversation with your
partner before you go and do something
like this? because she wrote a letter.
>> Oh gosh.
>> Obviously, this is your worst nightmare,
she said. But we all have to do scary
things sometimes, Alex.
>> Guys, I've got a quick favor to ask you.
We're approaching a significant
subscriber milestone on this show, and
roughly 69% of you that listen and love
this show haven't yet subscribed for
whatever reason. If there was ever a
time for you to do us a favor, if we've
ever done anything for you, given you
value in any way, it is simply hitting
that subscribe button. and it means
[clears throat] so much to myself but
also to my team because when we hit
these milestones we go away as a team
and celebrate and it's the thing the
simple free easy thing you can do to
help make this show a little bit better
every single week. So that's a favor I
would ask you and um if you do
[clears throat] hit the subscribe button
I won't let you down and we'll continue
to find small ways to make this whole
production better. Thank you so much for
being part of this journey. Means the
world. And uh yeah, let's do this.
[music]
Alex to understand you. I think from
everything I've learned about you, from
the research I've done, from speaking to
your wife, your agent, everybody I could
speak to, I think to understand your
context, we first need to understand the
circumstances in which you were raised
and the childhood you had because it
seems to be I mean for all of us there's
like fingerprints left on us that define
the anomaly um that many of us become
including yourself. So what do I need to
know? What does the viewer need to know
about the early context?
>> I mean, how deep do you want to go? I
need get a sofa. I need to reply.
[laughter] Like, all right. Uh, but
yeah, certainly there's a there's an
imprint from my parents, my upbringing.
I mean, they had a a very fraught
relationship. They eventually got
divorced, but they stayed together for
the kids and it was a whole like, you
know, say a tense home life because
neither of them really liked each other.
And then my mom is very driven, very,
you know, high performing. And then my
dad was hard to say. I mean, I think my
dad was deeply depressed basically the
whole time I knew him cuz he was in this
relation. You know, it's hard to tell.
He wasn't living his best life. And then
sadly after they got divorced, he was he
was much happier, but then he died. And
so then never really got to see uh never
really got to see him blossom that much.
>> And your mother's high performing. And
did did she sort of implicitly demand
that of you in any way?
>> Yeah, I mean my mother speaks like seven
or eight languages. She like plays every
instrument. It's like kind of crazy.
She's very artistically minded in that
way, like you know, the arts and
classical sense. But um yeah, she I mean
she wanted us to do all those things
too. I'm a deep disappointment in that
regard.
>> There was a phrase that I saw when I was
watching the documentary that your your
mother would continually say which I
think translates to something like not
good enough like pressing a ka like
almost like almost doesn't count. It's
funny because I feel like uh a lot of my
adult life now one of my sort of go-to
sayings is you know don't let perfect be
the enemy of good. I'm really into like
good enough. Like it's better to like
try. It's better to do something, you
know, it's better to fail quickly and
learn and keep moving forward than to
not try something. Like basically, I
don't want to be crippled by
perfectionism. Sort of like my mom is
very much a perfectionist, you know,
like if you can't do it right, don't do
it. I'm sort of like I think it's better
to try and learn and improve,
>> but she's accomplished a lot of things
with that approach.
>> Yeah, she Yeah, she has for sure.
>> What about emotions? This is something
you I've had heard you sort of talked
about a lot is in that environment where
your mother and father aren't getting
along well. I think I I heard you say
that your you hadn't seen your father
really happy before he'd passed away.
>> Yeah.
>> Was it an emotional household in terms
of affection?
>> No, it was a very unemotional household.
That said though, you know, it was a
safe, relatively happy household. Like
it was it was fine, you know, and and I
was close to a lot of my extended
family. And so I had a really good
relation with my grandparents and some
my aunts and uncles. And so I mean I
basically would have characterized it as
a totally happy family life until I
became older and started seeing other
people's families more and was kind of
like, "Oh, this seems even happier." You
know what I mean? It's like basically
really good until you see what what else
it can be and then you're like this
seems even better.
>> And your mom wasn't ever affectionate.
>> You know, it always feels slightly
conditional, you know, where it's like
uh you know, she cares if you be you
know, if you perform well, like if you
do well, like if you're a good kid or
whatever, you know what I mean?
>> Where where did climbing come into your
life? Cuz I've got some I have found
some photos of you climbing and you look
your like with your sister, I believe.
Here we go. This one here.
>> Yeah. Classic. How old have you been?
>> I don't know. I mean, I don't know, like
six or something or eight. It's hard for
me to tell like medium-sized kids ages.
Why? Why climbing?
>> Oh, why not? It's so freaking cool. Have
you Have you rock climbed?
>> I've Yeah, I have.
>> You gone to a gym?
>> Yeah, I've I have. But
>> And wasn't it the freaking coolest
thing?
>> It was fun. Yeah, for sure. I mean,
saying I've climbed when I'm sat with
you is I feel like
>> Yeah. But you have tried it.
>> Yeah, I have. Yeah.
>> As an adult, if you can imagine as a kid
how fun that is. And then if you just
keep doing that non-stop and then you
find that you're, you know, have some
aptitude for it, you enjoy it. It's
like, you know, you can imagine going
down that path. It's so cool.
>> But is there something about the
challenge of climbing that you think
just kind of like was a jigsaw piece for
your for you your brain? Like problem
solving?
>> Well, I think there's something
elemental about climbing in the same way
as like running or swimming. It's like a
basic movement thing that I think is
quite enjoyable. And I think that I also
I I think I have an innate love of like
being on top of things like, you know,
being at the top. Basically, I love big
views. I like the expansive, you know, I
like air and so I like being up on
stuff. So, I don't know. I think it just
hit a few sweet spots like that where I
was like, "Oh, climbing is just so
cool." And
>> you I'm assuming you never thought this
could be a career.
>> No. No. And actually, even when I
started rock climbing sort of full-time,
I still didn't think it could be a
career because there just wasn't really
professional climbing at that time. It
was like much smaller. The industry is
way smaller. Climbing was way more
fringe and like less of a thing. But you
weren't motivated by like money or
anything cuz one does not pursue rock
climbing to become No. Rich.
>> Not to become rich. No. Well, so I said
though, so my father died like the
season before that. And because my
parents had just gotten divorced, he
basically left his retirement to my
sister and me and she used it to finish
college. I just put it into bonds and
was living off like 300 bucks a month or
whatever, which kind of like worked. You
know, I was like living in a car. I
stole my mom's minivan at the time. I
had like a couple hundred bucks a month
and it was kind of enough to just like
go to be a 19-year-old just like
camping, you know.
>> Was it this minivan?
>> No, that's my second one. That's the
Ford Econoline. That's the first actual
van that I bought. I lived in that van
for 10 years.
>> For 10 years?
>> Yeah. Yeah. So, I bought this van. I
mean, this is this is classic. But so, I
bought this van for 10 grand. And and
then originally, this is the last
buildout, which is the classiest
buildout. The original one my uncle and
I did for free with like scrap wood from
his, you know, in his wood shop.
basically. And uh and so then I lived in
that for 10 years and you're kind of
like, yeah, when you live in it, I
couldn't even stand in this van, you
know, I was like, "Oh, my back." But you
know, when you're living in your car for
10 years, you save quite a lot of money.
>> Between what ages did you live in your
car for 10 years?
>> I probably bought this van when I was
20. So 20 to 30 basically.
>> H does the
>> Yeah, actually I think that's right
because um because I think I met my wife
when I was 30 and that same year I
switched from this van to the bigger
van. And if you've seen the film Free
Solo, that's um I bought the the
ProMaster, this like Dodge. It was like
I could stand up in my van finally
[clears throat] and I was like, I'm
moving up in the world. I can stand
>> in there really well. Oh, there's there
is a little stove in this one, but
>> yeah. So, this though is the I did three
different buildouts of this van over the
10 years cuz like the original one was
super scrappy. The second build was like
a little nicer and then this was like a
pretty nice build that I had for I don't
know, five or six years or something.
When you live in your van for 10 years
and you have a mother who is very
performance focused, I've got um her
here. I believe you coming with her.
Classic.
>> Do you not face a lot of external
pressure to like go get a real job?
Honestly, less so than you would think.
Um
like to her credit, my mom was always
pretty supportive of the whole path. I
think, you know, I was kind of lucky
that that I did a lot of this when I was
like young enough that it's all part of
like you're gappier like, you know, it's
like you're young and you're finding
yourself and then and then I think there
was enough sort of external validation
that that my family could at least look
at and be like, well, you seem to be
good at this random thing even though we
don't get it and don't really know what
you're doing, but at least other people
think you're good at it. So, keep doing
your thing.
>> And at this point, was it was it rock
climbing? Was it free soloing? And
>> yeah, it's all a little bit of
everything, but basically just being a I
mean, you know, like being a
professional climber, quote unquote.
Some of it's free soloing, some it's
like speed climbing, some of it's just
hard climbing, some of it's going on
expeditions, doing new roots, like it's
a little bit of everything.
>> And for the average person that doesn't
know what free soloing is, what's the
like definition of it?
>> That's climbing without a robe. So
climbing without protection, which is
definitely what I'm most well known for
now, but in the context of professional
climbing, I've done tons of other things
in climbing. Like most of the time you
have a rope on, most of the time you're
doing other sorts of things. But it's
like the free souling is what you might
have been well known for because that
like breaks into the mainstream a lot
more.
>> I'm really intrigued generally by people
like you who like take I mean take the
path less traveled in their career and
then maybe nearer the the end of the
graph pick up traction. And I have this
piece of paper in this pen because I'd
love if you could from the age of let's
say 80 you're now 40 years old.
>> Yeah I turned 40 this year old. Could
you draw a graph showing how your career
looks in terms of success? You can
measure that by money or attention or
whatever. Let's see. So,
>> it was kind of like
>> nothing.
>> Slow a little bit and then like thisish.
>> Yeah.
>> And then kind of like and then basically
just like in like this where you
basically like kind of flat but growing
and then you have free solo where it
jumps a ton. It's like kind of crazy.
And then and then it keeps kind of
growing at a slightly faster rate than
before and then it basically jumps a ton
because of the building thing again.
>> I I find this fascinating because most
people in their lives wouldn't be
willing to endure this phase 18 to 29
where
>> it's not enduring. It's so great. Like I
would do that again. I loved it so much.
Like I mean I often think I'd be so
happy to just start over from zero
because like all the places that I go
climbing now I've been climbing there
for 20 years and I've like done most of
the things I can do and you know I've
sort of like tapped out a lot of stuff
in the western US and I'm like man I
would love to just hit the rezero button
and start over because you'd have so
much stuff to do and it's so amazing.
>> I guess that's the that's the different
the fault of my question is that I said
the word endure but you see it as
>> Yeah. You get to climb every single
thing you see. It's amazing.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, and that's the thing
is like from age 18 to to 30, I
basically did try to climb every single
thing I could see because I was just
like, I'm learning. I'm growing. This is
amazing. I climb everything. And like
now I'm actually much more strategic
about it because doing tons of easy
climbing like doesn't really help me at
this point. I'm not going to make like
big technique gains. It basically just
makes me tired without without the right
kind of gains. It'd be like somebody
it'd be like an elite runner just
jogging for miles and miles every day.
And you're kind of like that's not going
to make you it's not going to improve
your marathon time if you're already
like an elite runner. It's it might be
fun, but it's just not going to like
move the needle for you. Through this
period of your life, 18 to 30, you're
optimizing for just having fun, doing
things you enjoy.
>> Well, I mean, no, I was always I was
always challenging myself. Like
basically, I was optimizing for like
what's the next thing I can do that
pushes me a little bit.
>> But you weren't optimizing for how to
get rich or
>> Well, then I would have gotten a job. If
I was optimizing for getting rich, I
would have freaking finished my college
degree and gotten a job.
>> I say this in part because I interview
so many people who pursued careers that
are often considered not real jobs, like
comedians or magicians.
>> And I tend to find the same thing
between the age of 18 and 30, they
optimize for something that isn't
necessarily being rich or famous. And
then at some point the graph looks like
this. Well, it's because I mean I think
I'm sure you know this, but I mean the
the world really it's like a winner take
all economy type deal. It's like
basically if you're the dude that does
the thing, all of a sudden your earnings
go insane.
>> But until you become the dude that does
the thing, you know, if you're like the
best magician or the best comedian or
the best whatever, then all of a sudden
you make an insane amount of money. But
when you're just like one of many
struggling comedians, you're, you know,
you're struggling. And so I think for me
as a climber, you're sort of like, oh,
I'm just a dude living in my van
climbing. But then a certain point, I'm
like the dude that, you know, I'm like,
[clears throat] oh, you're that guy that
climbs without the rope. And you're
like, oh yeah, cool. And then all of a
sudden your earnings are like
>> Was this um was this a difficult period
of your life this 18 to 30?
>> No, it was like the best. Well,
obviously it was like f, you know, I was
like trying to juggle rel like I wanted
to get a girlfriend. You're a young 20s
man living alone in a car like wanting
to be better at something than you are
and not not quite knowing the way, not
knowing what you're doing with your
life. So no, so obviously there was tons
of emotional turmoil throughout it, but
no, I mean retrospectively it's like
amazing. And your your dad passes away
which is in part I guess some of the
catalyst for
>> Yeah. Honestly my dad passing away
should be the beginning of that graph.
It should be this should basically start
at 19 cuz uh 18 I went to university and
so then uh starting at 19 I guess I uh
went on the road.
>> Your dad passing
what impact did that have on you outside
of it somewhat liberating you to to make
decisions that outside of his
expectations?
>> Well I mean obviously it was you know
it's sad. It's hard like and especially
now I'm sort of like oh it's too bad
that that I don't have a relationship
with my dad and he doesn't you know that
my kids don't have a grandfather and all
that kind of you know it's like yeah
it's it's tough. I think that the most
immediate impact that had maybe was just
reminding me of my own mortality, you
know, I mean, he he died unexpectedly at
55, just fell over in the airport and
just fell over dead. Um, like heart
attack. And so, you know, I mean, I
think that that reminder of my own
mortality has had a big impact on my
career, my life, you know, my climbing
world, whatever. one might not expect
you to go quote unquote do risky things
because of
>> well [clears throat] no because the
thing is I think one of the reasons that
people don't do risky things is because
they have this uh you know mistaken idea
that they can live forever basically and
basically because people don't want to
think about their own mortality and so
they're like oh I don't want to take any
risks I could die and you're like you
know that you're going to die either way
and either way when you die you're going
to be bummed that you didn't live longer
because you know it's like like the life
expect 78 and you're like Say you make
it to for men, whatever. Like, say you
make it that far, you're still going to
be like, man, I wish I had 22 more years
to like watch my grandkids graduate
college or whatever, you know, it's like
it's still going to feel like too
little.
>> And so, I'm kind of like, you're better
off dying at 55 in an accident, but
having done many things that you're
proud of and, you know, like led a life
that you're that you're proud of than
dying at 78 and still wishing you had
more, but having done none of the things
you wanted to do. It
>> is interesting. It does appear that
people live as if we think we're going
to live forever. Yeah, it's totally
insane. I mean, everyone's like, "Oh, I
don't take any risk." And you're like,
"Yeah, well, you can take no risk in
your life and you're still going to
freaking die." So, you might as well
take smart, calculated risks and do all
the things that you want to do and at
least die happy when you go.
>> What does this mean to you to like live
intentionally?
>> Well, that's exactly it. Like choosing
the the risk that you're willing to
take, making choices, like using your
time the way you want to use it.
>> I was looking at I think it was your
your personality a personality test you
did. You said you
>> like did I do a personality test? Um
like how much material do you have? I'm
like Jesus [laughter] Christ. Like how
many like things do you have?
>> I have unlimited things.
>> I know. I'm so impressed
>> on this uh personality test. It says
you're you know higher on thrillseeking
and sensation seeking but then also
significantly higher than the average
male on urgency which I think kind of
overlays with what you were just saying
there of like making the decision to do
something.
>> Yeah. Basically because your time is
short and you're going to die so get on
with it.
>> It says here you're higher on
conscientiousness.
>> Very polite. You know,
>> thrill seeking, sensation seeking,
you're low on boredom.
>> I think low on boredom means that, you
know, you don't get bored.
>> Perseverance. You're very high on
perseverance.
>> Yeah, I think that's the same as low on
boredom.
>> And low on neuroticism.
>> That's for sure.
>> And so, what's your what is what's the
definition of the word neuroticism? Is
it like
>> Well, I think it's like the Well, I'm
sure there's a clinical definition, but
I think of it as sort of general anxiety
type stuff, like, you know, people
spinning in their heads about things
that don't matter. And has that always
been the case when you look back through
your life and the feedback you've had as
a kid and a teenager? Kind of. Yeah. I
think so. I think I've never been too
concerned about I I don't spin. I mean,
obviously, you know, occasionally I
stress about things, but but just not
the way I think a lot of people do.
>> I'm trying to figure out if that's a
learned behavior or maybe a little bit
learned and a little bit um from your
upbringing, genetics, whatever it might
be. Because can can one learn that? Can
one learn to be less neurotic and
>> Well, presumably I mean like meditation,
things like that. I think people can
sort of find a way to let go of certain
things.
>> Isn't this quite quite interesting when
people ask you questions inevitably
about fear and how you take on such you
know to muggles like me terrifying
challenges. There's an element of all of
this which is you do have a nature and
and a nurture which somewhat is
impossible for someone like me to
replicate
>> because your brain and my brain are
completely different. Your parents your
early contacts when your brain was being
wired and malated are completely
different to mine. So, you know, I
always find this is the like the trouble
of giving people advice is
um we're dealing with different
different natures,
>> different natures.
>> But I I do feel like in my case, the
biggest difference in nature is the fact
that I've just always loved climbing,
you know, because I basically I think
that nurture is is the majority of this.
Like if you spend 30 years training a
thing, you're going to get better at the
thing.
>> And [clears throat] so I think that the
biggest difference between me and and
somebody who's not into rock climb is I
freaking love rock climbing. I could go
I could do it 10 days a week if if I
could, you know what I mean? But sadly,
I get too tired and my body breaks down.
And so, you know, I could I basically
have like a limitless capacity to to do
the thing. I just love doing the thing.
And I think that that is probably the
biggest difference in nature, you know,
because everything else you can kind of
overcome, you know, like if you loved
rock climbing as much as I love rock
climbing, no matter what your your
genetic disposition towards like
neuroticism and all that stuff, you
would just kind of work through all that
stuff and you'd find your own path to to
getting good at climbing basically.
>> If your kids came to you, you have two
girls, right?
>> Yeah.
>> If they came to you and said, "Dad, like
give me advice on what I should aim at
in life."
>> Would you tell I wouldn't I wouldn't
give them advice. I'd be like, "You do
you find the thing you love to do, go
hard, you know, basically like learn
some skills, get good at something, like
what do you like to do?" I mean, that's
kind of the thing for me, especially
with climbing is like if someone had
told me like, "You're going to train
climbing for the rest of your life." I'd
be like, "Oh, that sounds like kind of a
grind, you know, cuz I mean, it is it is
hard work. You're like hiking uphill
with a heavy backpack and it's cold and
it's windy. It's like it's basically
physically uncomfortable." I mean, being
a professional rock climber means that
you're physically uncomfortable
all the time, but like like often, you
know, like it's you know, it's hard.
>> Yeah. But if you're doing it because you
freaking love doing it, it doesn't feel
very hard. And so, I mean, I think the
key for a kid is find the thing that
doesn't feel like hard work.
>> And when you started, were you scared of
of big tall rock faces and stuff like
that?
>> I mean, yeah, I had like a healthy
intimidation of I mean, like my first
season, the first time seeing Elcap as a
climber, uh, I was 19 and it looks
impossible. It looks completely insane.
I was like, that's so big. But then, you
know, within a couple seasons, uh, you
know, I climbed some bigger walls,
learned how to climb, and then a friend
and I had the sort of season goal, like
we were going to climb all season with
the aspiration at the end to climb Elcap
in a day. So, basically, there was this
long progression on LCAP specifically
where it's like you go from just trying
to get up it to trying to get up it
faster to trying to get up it with just
your hands and feet, still using
protection. But basically, there's like
all these steps you can take. And so,
over a bunch of seasons, you know, I
climbed a cap like 60 times, different
routes, all these different things. And
then eventually you're sort of like,
"Oh, maybe I can start thinking about
freoling it." Which is where the film
Free Solo comes in. And then eventually
you do this thing. But then people like,
"Well, aren't you scared?" And you're
kind of like, "Wow, I've spent 10 years
like building up on this thing."
>> I guess that's what people don't see.
>> Yeah.
So they just
>> I mean like the documentary Free Soul I
think does a pretty good job of showing
the the direct preparation like the
training involved in doing that specific
climb, but it just doesn't show the
uh like eight years before that I guess
cuz the documentary was filmed over two
years and I guess I've been going since
2006. So it's nine years before that
that I've been going to use and I've
been spending maybe three months a year
climbing walls.
I guess that's the illusion of like all
people that do great things and then
become like athletes or sprinters or
whatever Ronaldo or Messi is you you
don't get to see the
>> Yeah. the whole life that they put into
doing the thing.
>> Yeah.
>> So it looks it looks like a magic trick
when we see the outcome. Like we show
show up on Netflix to watch you climb
Taipei like whoa
>> hanging with it from his leg.
>> Yeah. I mean people watch some of those
programs and they're like he just walked
up and did it. And you're like well yeah
after 30 years of practice like I just
walked up and did it. But no it's not
like just walking up and doing it. Hm.
>> I mean, like, yeah, I've literally been
climbing 5 days a week for 30 years.
Like, that's so much climbing. Like, I
freaking love climbing and I climb a
lot.
>> On this on this idea of like exposure
therapy as it relates to like fear and
anxiety and confronting one's uh things
that terrify them. Was there in the
early days were you I'm trying to
understand. Were you like scared at some
point?
>> Oh, all the time. That's actually
something that I think uh you know I've
obviously done so many interviews around
fear and like managing fear and all that
and I've talked about fear a lot of
different ways over over the years and I
think as I've gotten older I've sort of
come to realize that that actually
you're just scared all the time as a
climber like low-level fear low like but
you're but climbing is fundamentally
scary like it's always kind of scary
because there always consequences like
even if you're climbing with a rope
you're still always visualizing like
what happens if the rope breaks like
what if you know like is this safe like
you know is the gear good like is is
actually safe. And so you're always a
little bit scared. And so after years
and years of always being scared, you
get pretty good at managing that kind of
stuff
>> because there's a lot of sort of
misconceptions swirling around this
brain scan you.
>> Yeah. I know. I hate all that stuff.
That's just all from the film Free Solo.
>> It was like too short of a scene in the
film. They needed a little more. They
need to let it breathe, you know,
explain things a little better, I think.
>> So they scanned a control subject.
another person scanned you, looked at
the amydala in your brain, and that the
conclusion that a lot of people have
arrived at is that you don't experience
fear because when they look at these two
brain scans, your amydala is lighting up
less when you're shown scary images
basically, right? But like shown just
this image, like what does that even
mean? Like my brain's purple and his
brain is orange. You're like, like what
does that mean? Like I don't know. But
no, I mean the the thing is though, and
this is what I wish was explained in the
film better, is that this is we're being
shown black and white photos inside an
fMRI. So, you're inside a sealed metal
tube. You're totally safe. You're
physically safe and comfortable. And
you're being shown black and white
photos. And so, to me, obviously, that's
not going to light up the fear response
in my brain because you're looking at
pictures. You're like, who cares? I'm
totally safe. But in a control subject,
uh, you know, apparently your brain sort
of responds to images one way or
another. But I'm kind of like, I've been
climbing for 20 years, so I've been like
scared quite a lot. And you're kind of
like, well, black and white photos start
to lose lose their edge if you've been
scared all the time for 20 years. So,
it's like obviously that's not going to
trigger much.
>> Yeah. Yeah. And I imagine everybody in
their life can think of a scenario where
they have mastery that would sc like a
stand-up comedian looking out at a stage
probably wouldn't be as scared as me.
>> Yeah.
>> Because that would that would terrify
me. Um so again, this is not necessarily
some sort of neurological
>> No, I mean I think the real takeaway is
that I have an amydala and it works.
>> Mhm.
>> You know what [clears throat] I mean?
like cuz I think if if the results had
shown that I was missing my amydala then
I would have all kinds of I would have
died already at youth cuz I wouldn't be
able to function as a as a human
basically but you know had it shown
something like that where there are like
structural differences or like some real
change but this is basically just
showing that after 20 years of
conditioning I respond differently than
an average person and you're like yeah
no kidding like if you put a monk into
an fMRI their brain responds totally
differently than average person as well
>> which I actually think is a really
inspiring conclusion because it means
that we can all
>> grasp our fears better. And even, you
know, people won't know this about me,
but 10 years ago, I sat down on camera
with my friend Ash in his apartment to
record a two-minute video. And as I sat
there, I couldn't I was so scared I
couldn't get the words out. So, you
actually in this 2-minute video that
comes out, you see it go from night and
day in the background just because we
did that many cuts over 7 hours to try
and get me to say 2 minutes on camera.
And obviously, after 10 years of being
on camera, I can now speak without
myself. And I imagine my brain
state looks significantly different
because of our exposure therapy.
>> Totally. Yeah. Hey, you should do the
fMRI. You should Yeah. You should have
done 10 years ago cuz then you'd have
your control and then you do it now and
it'd be totally different.
>> But also, the psychologists I've sat
with all confirm this. They talk about
exposure therapy.
>> Yeah. And and I went through exactly the
same thing with public speaking. Like I
was always so afraid of public speaking.
I was also very shy and like just not
like it was terrifying. And now because
of the free solo film tour and you know
all the public things I've done since
then, I'm like basically fine. And you
know, it's like you still got a little
nervous, but it's like basically easy
now. You're kind of like, well, that's a
total change. It's like obviously
there's a tremendous capacity for humans
to learn.
>> People talk to you about fear all the
time because I mean your work cuz
climate is really freaking scary. It
makes sense. It's totally
understandable. Yeah.
>> Yeah. And they also realize, I think, at
some deep level that the thing holding
them back from who they think they want
to be or who they aspire to be is fear.
Often it's judgment of someone else.
It's taking a risk.
>> Totally. So, you've become for many
people the like, tell me, tell me how to
overcome.
>> Yeah. Well, I think that everyone's
like, "What's your hack to overcome
fear?" And you're like, "There's no
hack. You just get really freaking
scared over and over for so long and
eventually it's not that scary anymore."
But I will say that that's like a very
enduring way to overcome your fear is
like if you're willing to go through
that process, then you are actually
unafraid, you know, because like you can
do like hacks. I mean, you can you can
like crank up loud rock music and just
go for it, you know? Like, and there are
plenty of examples of that in in what
I'd call gravity assisted sports. Like,
say if you're going to jump a cliff on
skis, like you can get to the edge, be
like, "This is really scary." And then
be like 3 2 1 do it and just like go. In
climbing, you can't really do that as
much because it's so slow. Like when you
climb, you make one move and then you
make another move and then you're like,
"Do I still want to be here?" Like it
basically fear creeps in a lot more. But
sort of in gravity assisted sports, you
can have more of that moment where you
just like overcome your fear and then it
happens, you know, like making a big
drop in a kayak or like skis or things
like that where it's like once you
commit, it's happening one way or
another.
>> Anyway, there's a lot to get into with
like
>> No, but I mean I want to get into it. I
watched a video of you climbing Half
Dome, I think it was, and it looks like
you got scared halfway up or
>> Yeah. Yeah. Well, so that video is
actually filmed later. So the voice over
in that video is me talking about the
experience of me freestyling when I was
totally alone. And I did get really
scared on halfdome and I had this whole
somewhat traumatic climate experience
near the top of the wall. But then when
we went back to film it, I had a
different traumatic experience while we
were filming. Less traumatic but uh but
like very scary for a moment and they
got that on camera. So they basically in
the film they just cut the two together
as like a because it shows me like being
really scared.
>> What's Half Dome to start with and then
what was the traumatic experience?
>> Yeah. So Halfdme for anyone who hasn't
seen is uh is this just totally amazing
wall in Euseite. It's a 2,000 foot
granite face. Actually it's the North
Face logo. It's a It's freaking It's
That's That's half dome.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. So, it's like an iconic wall in
Euseity.
>> Um it looks like half of a dome, but
actually it's more like a hockey puck
just shoved in. It's actually a full
dome depending how you look at it. But
the Northwest Faces vertical for 2,000
ft is incredible. And so I freelled.
That was one of the first like major
free soulas I did in 2008. Um and one of
the things that sort of made me a
professional climber in a way. But when
I did the climb, I did the bare minimum
preparation. I basically like didn't
know. It was it was the biggest thing
I'd ever freed. I didn't quite know how
to like go about getting ready for it.
Anyway, I I climbed it and basically
hadn't practiced enough. Was really
freaking scared. Got off route, got
confused, skipped some stuff, and then
at the very top had this whole moment of
extreme panic, you know? Basically, I
got up into some stuff and all sort of
like crumbled mentally and like sort of
barely managed to finish this upper
slab. Like the hardest part of the climb
was like right near the top. I was
trying to walk across this ledge.
Basically, I've walked across that ledge
face in and face out. you normally
people hand traverse it or they crawl
across it. There are like different ways
to go across the ledge and I've done it
every which way and then we were up
there filming and I was like I'm going
to walk it face out but it turns out
when you walk it face out it's really
freaking scary. And so I made it kind of
halfway and was like oh my gosh and then
bailed.
>> And when you say you having like a like
a crisis in your your mind, what does
what is that? Is that just oh my god
what am I like how does that sound when
you
>> Well, I mean so in this case so walking
across this ledge it's like it starts
maybe as a foot wide. So your foot is
fully on the ledge and you're shuffling
across it. But then at a certain point,
yeah, I mean that's that's
>> the video I'll put on the screen for
anyone watching.
>> Yeah, that's that's the ledge. But
basically at the narrowest part, your
feet are sticking out over the lip of it
and the wall bulges ever so slightly. So
it for forces your back out a little and
so you're basically like rocking on your
heels with I don't know like a 1700T
drop or something, 18800t drop like
straight down below you and so you know
it's like pretty it's pretty intense.
Anyway, and so I thought I was going to
walk across it like that and I made it
to the bulging part and was suddenly
like, "Oh my god, this isn't like this
isn't for me." And then managed to like
shuffle back and and change my strategy.
>> Is it like panic in your head?
>> It's not panic, but you're like, "Oh,
oh, I made the wrong choice. Like, this
is bad. This is bad." You know? I mean,
it's not like full like five alarm bell
like panic panic, but yeah, you're like,
"Oh, I'm so screwed."
>> And you have fallen a long long way
before. I I was hearing about a time
when you were younger you fell off a a
mountain and called your mother, managed
to call your mother in
>> Yeah, though that was like sliding down
an icy cooler type thing. It's a little
different than like free falling off of
a cliff. That's like sliding down a
mountain. But yeah, I got totally messed
up and and uh Yeah. Yeah. And I've like
broken my arm several times as a kid
falling off things and and then with a
rope as a climber, you take big falls
like routinely, you know, when you have
protection. That's like part of the
sport basically.
M I mean it's certainly easy to
visualize falling 700. You know when
you're like standing on a little ledge
and you're just bulging and you're
looking down you're, you know, it's easy
to be like, "Oh my god." You know, it's
like if you just bend forward a little
bit, you're just going to take a swan
dive like 700 feet to the ground.
>> The stats in this sport are I mean of of
fatalities. How do they compare to other
sports?
>> Uh safer than you would think. That's
the thing is everyone thinks it seems
crazy, but uh it's not that crazy. I
don't know actual statistics, but I
suspect that it's actually pretty
comparable to to skiing or something,
you know, because like recreational
skiers die all the time, like falling
into tree wells or like going off cliffs
by accident or things like that.
Climbing is actually surprisingly safe,
which is one of the things I love about
climbing. I mean, climbing is very it's
very uh sort of binary where it's like
either you're totally safe or you're
going to die. And the odds of you dying
are very very very small. But because
they're they're there, they always keep
you on. You know what I mean? Like it
basically keeps you alert,
but you're never really gonna get hurt.
>> Is that including free soloing?
>> Yeah. I mean, for the most part, I mean,
a couple people have died free soling. I
mean, people occasionally die free
soloing for sure, but actually most of
the the sort of cutting edge free
soloists have not died soling. They've
like died in other things. I think it
was in in the um the documentary on
Netflix um Free Solo where one of your
colleagues
>> Yeah. Tommy Tommy is like most free
solos are dead now. Um which is kind of
true but it's slightly mis misstated. I
mean you know he's just like speaking
off the cuff and it's not like strictly
true. Like a couple of the best free
solos have died free soling though they
died on very easy terrain. But then the
majority of other great free solas have
died in sort of climbing adjacent
accidents like wings suit base jumping
and uh like one got swept to sea by a
rogue wave like while he was out
climbing a sea cliff but he was like
standing on shore and got swept out to
sea. You know things like that where
you're just kind of like you know
obviously they're taking risks in their
lives and they wind up dead but it's not
the way that people think. You know, you
see a photo like that and you're like,
"Free soul, you're going to die for
sure." And you're kind of like, "Well,
people don't actually really die that
way." I mean, they have. I mean, not to
say that it doesn't happen, but way less
frequently than people would suspect.
>> If I was to try and like, you know,
[clears throat] professionally torture
you, and again, I'm not talking in
extremes here, but what life would I
prescribe you to live?
>> Oh, being like a finance bro or
something. Having to like just work
spreadsheets my whole life. Is that what
you mean? Like what what is my like
worst
>> I don't know, something like that. or
honestly being like a choreographer for
dance or something like I just I
couldn't do like or or being like an
opera singer like I would just kill
myself. I just couldn't do that.
>> Why Why would being a finance bro be
like the worst thing for Alex?
>> Just the idea of sitting at a computer
in a cubicle just like typing. I mean
I'm kind of contrarian. I don't like
rules. I don't want to like jump through
hoops. I don't want to do arbitrary
things. Like I don't want some manager
to come and tell me like, "Oh, you got
to file that report again. You like
missed a line." I'd be like, "You go f,"
you I just like walk out of the building
like it's just I just like don't know if
I could take that be like no. But that's
like how most of the world live. We kind
of we all live in like you know
>> I just don't know if it's for me.
I don't know. I mean doesn't that just
seem I mean I had this moment I've been
in New York a couple days and I I took
the subway down to see some see some
friends and I was like coming out of the
tunnel and it's like packed with people
and I was just like looking at the
ground and I was like just you know
following someone else's footsteps up
this like beat down path of stairs and I
was like I couldn't live like this. like
not day in and day out every day like
this is just like feeling like you're
just doing the exact same thing as
everyone else around you. I'm like oh it
seems so so boring.
It's funny cuz so so many of us look at
your life and go wow that's not very
normal but actually maybe at a
foundational level you're living a much
more normal life than I mean you're out
in nature you're moving your body.
>> Yeah. Yeah. In that in that way for sure
I'm like going on cool adventures and
going out and I don't know. I think
that's also part of why the the sort of
attraction and allur with your life
especially when you watch free solo is
you do seem to be a free man
in a way where most of us aren't free as
such.
>> Yeah. I mean well I think we're all sort
of aspiring to that to some extent. I
mean most people see that though as like
they get their vacation for the year.
They they're planning to retire at some
point and then they're going to have
their freedom and you're kind of like I
don't know. I mean maybe you got to try
to live that way as much as possible.
>> If if your if your young girls came up
to you June and Alice and said, "Dad,
what's what is a meaningful life? like
what are the principles of living a
fulfilling meaningful life? Would you
give them advice there?
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, it'd be a long
rambling multi-day conversation with
them about But I mean, following your
own goals is is I think, you know,
certainly one of the the cores of having
a meaningful life, like having things
that you find valuable. I mean, really
like living in line with your values,
finding things that are important to you
and pursuing them with as much as you
can give them. you when you look at your
early so 20s to 30s it kind of looks
like you're living like a Buddhist a
little bit.
>> I mean yeah I went on a a trip once
where they called me the monk
just because I was living such a sort of
a seated lifestyle. I was like reading
I've never I don't drink and I don't
like party and I didn't just for
personal preference whatever. So I'm
just like living in my little van and
reading books and climbing all the time
like those are the things that I'm into
doing you know. It's like it's yeah it's
just doing what you want to do.
Have you ever been depressed or?
>> Yeah, probably not like deep clinical
depression, but there's certainly
periods from time to time where you're
just like, what am I doing or why or
what are my goals? Like, you know,
what's And I think to me the most
depressing thing is that, you know, I've
put like my whole life into climbing,
like trying to be the best you can be
all the time. And sometimes you put tons
of effort in and you just don't see
results. Like for whatever reason, you
just suck. You're like, I'm trying so
hard and I'm just like not as good as I
want to be. And like that's challenging,
you know? But that's
I mean everybody faces that to some
extent where you're like I'm working
hard at a thing but I'm just not
achieving the results that I want.
>> And between the between that the sort of
that period of no man's 20 and 30 where
your career hasn't taken off yet the
documentary is not out. You've not
climbed Taipei. How much money are you
earning from climbing?
>> I mean the first my first couple years
my sponsorship through the Northace was
like uh I think my first year was like
10k a year. I was like this is amazing.
cuz I was living in my car and uh you
know making 10 grand when you live by
yourself in a van is like more than you
need basically. Um it obviously went up
but beyond that at some point but it was
you know like in the 10 to 100 range for
the first for the whole yeah for years.
>> Then at some point it increases.
>> Yeah. And then it increases. I mean then
free solo is obviously like a big thing
and that sort [clears throat] of opened
up all these opportunities. Uh because
then I started doing corporate speaking
and stuff like that. And I mean, as I'm
sure you know, that's just like a whole
different world. And so then you go from
just like making some money from
sponsors to like making money from from
other corporations stuff. And then
you're like, okay, now you're making
some money.
>> One of the things when I was I was
hearing you talk about some of your
incredible climbing stories is um I was
trying to understand what role
visualization or or your preparation
plays and how that's like transferable
to to me and my life. We talked a little
bit about just how much preparation you
did for something like LCAP,
>> but you you it sounds like you really
break down the challenge into smaller
bits and then really go through those
individual steps, whereas a lot of
people would just look at LCAP and go,
"Oh my god, they'll be terrified."
>> And then say impossible.
>> Yeah. Which is fair. I mean, I spent
years looking at LCAP and being like,
"That's too big. That's impossible." And
then, you know, after years of that, I
kept hoping that I would look at it and
it would like look easy somehow and I'd
be like, "Cool, now I'm going to do it."
And it just never looked easy. And so
then finally I was like, "Okay, I'm
gonna have to like put some real work
into it." And then I started slowly
breaking it down and and and then once
you like break it into pieces and start
working on the pieces, then you're kind
of like, "Okay, it starts to feel more
reasonable."
>> Break it into pieces and start working
on the pieces. What does that mean in
terms of climbing? So if we I mean I've
got this this uh model here of
>> type. So you know, and this is also a
metaphor for any challenge I have in my
life.
>> But this is actually perfect because
it's right here.
>> Yeah.
>> So I scouted this in September of this
year. I did the climb in January. or
whatever. In September, we went and um
well, we had to like one make sure it
was possible before you sort of like
commit to it doing a whole TV program.
We were kind of like, let's make sure we
can do this. And then they also had to
get all this sort of marketing material.
You like get the photos with the
building, like all the stuff that
becomes the trailer and whatever. And so
we went in September to sort of like do
the prep. And so we I basically checked
out all the different pieces. And so
anywhere where you see it looking a
little bit different, you know, it's
like this whole bottom part is like a
low angle slab. It's like punctuated
with these two little rubies, these
little like coin things or whatever the
clouds or whatever they are. And then
there the dragons on the corners. These
are all overhanging. Like each of these
eight blocks is like a big overhanging
thing. It feels a little bit different.
Then you get up here, there's like these
balconies. These are actually
overhanging. Like basically each little
segment of this is quite different. And
you know, obviously on this model like
looks looks the same, but um each
transition between the different pieces
is like a thing. So I checked out all of
them with ropes and and yeah, you just
go piece by piece all the way up the
whole thing. And you hadn't ever climbed
it before we saw it on Netflix live.
>> Well, I hadn't freed it. No, but I had
climbed it. I climbed all the pieces
with a rope for sure. I'd like checked
out the different things.
>> Okay. So, so you you look at these as
individual challenges every step.
>> Yeah. It's like you go Well, even like
just getting off the ground, the first
move is a slightly different move than
any of the other moves. You have to like
jump up to a thing and like press it
out. Um then climbing over these little
clouds is a different thing. Each dragon
is a different thing. Yeah. Yeah, I mean
it's just, you know, there's a
surprising amount of complexity to it.
And so our first on the scout, you know,
I had a note on my phone and I'm just
like writing down all the different
basically I'm trying to learn it the way
you study anything where I'm just like
making notes and sort of like from floor
54 to 72 it feels like this. I climb the
southeast corner the left ar you know
just and then yeah just writing it all
down
>> and I mean there's this famous photo of
you hanging with your leg.
>> Yeah, that's this these are the rings up
here.
>> So you're hanging you're hanging here
from here with your leg. Yeah. Now, I
this is really a question of endurance.
Like, how do you plan to have the
energy?
Like, how do you know if you're going to
have enough energy when you're up here
when you're just planning it? Well,
>> I mean, what this this is what makes it
exciting because you can't be sure. But,
you know, I've done a lot of climbing in
my life, and I've done a lot of climbs
that were like 24 hours. I mean, I had
this experience in Patagonia once. It
was a 54-hour push. Like, the last 20
hours we hiked without food um cuz we
got caught in a storm. It's a whole
crazy story. But basically, you know,
I've had a lot of experiences in my life
where I've done hard exercise for more
than 24 hours. And so this, you know, I
expect it to take me somewhere in the
hour and a half, two hour range. And I'm
kind of like, yeah, I mean, I'll be
tired after 2 hours of exercise, but I'm
not going to be exhausted. You know what
I mean? Like, I know that I have a much
deeper reserve than that.
>> So much of the conversation around um
after you' done this, or some of the
conversation was around whether this was
a harder challenge than Al Capitan.
>> No, no, it's obviously much easier. I
mean, I'm doing on live television, you
know, it's like obviously it's easier,
but what makes it cool is that it's
different. It's fun. It's challenging.
Like for me, it's really like in my
sweet spot where it is challenging
enough like it's it's not easy. You know
what I mean? Like saying easier than
LCAP, it doesn't, you know, LCAP was
like a 10-year life project that I did
in absolute secrecy. I did it on my
terms on the correct day after years of
effort. I had failed attempts. I you
know what I like LCAP was like an
allconsuming life project for years kind
of like obviously you can't do that for
live TV. It's like you just can't put
anyway
>> but this was very much in my sweet spot
where you're like oh it's hard enough
that it's that it's hard like it's cool
you know like it's fun it's interesting
the climbing is engaging it's you know
gave me something to train for for
months it's like it's super fun but it's
not you know it's not like the absolute
limit of what I can do because you just
can't do that on live TV. I mean, if
nothing else, so I was climbing the
southeast because it gets good morning
light and it looks beautiful and it's
like great for filming. But if I was
trying to do the absolute most cutting
edge climb I could do, I'd be climbing
the northwest arette because it'd be
full shade because it'd be good better
conditions, you know, be colder. Like
you just don't want to be in the sun. It
makes your skin, you know, makes you hot
and stuff.
>> Mhm.
>> And [clears throat] so, you know, just
things like that. You're like, well, if
you're doing it for TV and you're trying
to broadcast it, then you want it to
look good. But like, if you're trying to
do it for hard climbing and good
conditions, you do in full shade. And
Netflix had a 10-second delay just in
case you fell.
>> I mean, I'm sure part of it is in case
you fall, but part of it's like, what if
somebody unplugs one of the things or,
you know what I mean? Like, it's so
complicated. There's so much stuff going
on, it's insane.
>> Was there a hardest part of this a part
where you were at all nervous?
>> The thing I was most nervous about when
I started was were the bamboo boxes,
like doing these eight overhanging
segments cuz they're just so
relentlessly the same move and it's just
it's pretty physical like you get tired
for sure. I mean, the actual physical
hardest moves, um, like actually
randomly one of these corners up here
would have been quite a hard move, but
there was this freaking security camera
bolted onto the wall. And so, you use
the security camera as this handle. It
was really freaking cool. And it was
like bolted on with these giant bolts,
so it like looked super safe and, you
know, it was like very robust and
secure, but it would have been kind of
like this extreme jump, which I wasn't,
you know, it's probably possible, but
would have been like a major thing, but
instead you just reef off the security
camera. And I was like, that's so cool.
It was uh so there are a few things like
that like individual moves that are kind
of muscly but overall it's the the
stamina like the challenge of doing this
over and over for hundreds of feet that
was the hardest thing.
>> Do you have a conversation with your
with your girls and wife before you go
and do something like this about just in
case you don't come back? I know the
>> not with the kids cuz they're too young
and like they wouldn't they don't
understand it anyway. Um and not with
her because she came with me to Taipei
or she was there for like the whole end
of I went a little bit earlier so I
could adapt to the time zone more and
like feel better. But um but basically
she was with me so you know like we went
to bed together that night and like woke
up that morning and had breakfast
together. So it didn't feel like a big
goodbye. You know it was kind of
actually she was with me at the base
like we did the start together and then
I literally was like okay bye and walked
over and did the thing and saw her again
going to the top. So we were only apart
for like an hour and a half of the whole
you know like and I saw her through the
window a couple times and so it felt
like she was just there having the whole
experience with me.
>> Did you look at other buildings in the
world like like the Burge? So, yeah,
I've scouted the Burge twice over the
years. Um, back when this project, this
project almost happened in 2013 or
something and so I'd scouted some
buildings then. The Burge was just a
little too extreme. It's just too hard.
But someday maybe, who knows?
>> Cuz it's what? Like there's not enough.
It's too slippery.
>> Um, yeah, super slippery. Also, it's
just the way the holds are. Like I mean,
the beauty of Typo 101 is that the holds
like they're good things to hold that
are close together and you're just like
and you can hold them and you feel
secure. the Burge. I can barely span tip
to tip to like reach between the holds.
>> And so then your face is like right
against the glass. You're like holding
on like this. And [clears throat] it's
pretty hard. And you have to do the same
thing 112 times in a row. It's like
pretty hard to do it once then you have
to do 100 times. You're like it's kind
of hard.
>> The other thing that I saw um online
after you'd climbed it about one or two
days after everyone talk started talking
about how much you were paid to do it.
>> I think cuz you did an interview.
>> It's funny. There were some quotes that
were kind of taken out of context
because yeah, a New York Times reporter
asked me how much I was getting paid and
I was kind of like I don't want to talk
about it cuz it's kind of embarrassing
cuz all my friends it's like an
embarrassingly high amount for my
community. Like in the climbing world if
you're getting paid to rock climb you're
like great success, you're getting paid
to climb. That's insane, you know? And
so I thought it was like sort of an
embarrassingly large amount. I'm like
this is kind of weird. But then he sort
of poked around and he started comparing
it to like boxing matches and stuff
where people get paid like $20 million
to like fight someone boxing. And I was
like, "Well, [clears throat] no,
compared to that, it's an embarrassingly
small amount." You know, it's like or if
you compare it to like major league
baseball contracts and things and it's
like, "Yeah, it's an embarrassingly
small amount, but I was never
complaining. Like, I thought it was
great. I mean, I would do it for free. I
mean, I've paid money to go up to the
observation deck. The observation deck
is way up here at the top and the view
is insane and the city's incredible."
And, you know, it's like 20 bucks or
whatever to take the world's fastest
elevator to the top of the building. And
you know, I've done that in the Burge as
well where you like pay the money and
you go to the very top of the building
and the view is insane. It's like I do
that like anywhere I travel like the Se
the Willis Tower, whatever the Sears
Tower in Chicago. Like I've paid the
money to go to the observation deck and
see the view and it's so cool. And I'm
kind of like if someone's willing to pay
me to climb up to the observation deck,
that's freaking cool.
>> Yeah. I think it's because people again
they're they're saying that they believe
that this is you're risking your entire
life. Yeah. And and so yeah, they don't
think of boxes as risking their entire
life in the same way.
>> They kind of are.
>> Unless they are. Yeah. But they don't
see it as that.
>> I know. Of course they don't see it as
that. And that's totally understandable.
I get that. But I see it as like anybody
going into the boxing ring, particularly
if they're very mismatched, you know,
like you would think that there is some
real chance of grievous injury or like
death,
>> you know? It's [clears throat] like it's
insane.
>> And so I think that people over the
thing is I think people that don't know
anything about anything like don't know
anything about climbing look at me
climbing a building. They're like it's
50/50 if he lives or dies. Like no idea.
And you're like no. If you put this in
the context of all the things that I've
gone in my life, I felt very confident
that I wouldn't fall off the building.
You know, I was like, you know,
obviously it's never 100% because like
whatever it's life, but you know, it
feels like 100%. You're like, oh,
there's no chance I'm falling off this
building.
>> The rumors were that you got 500k to
climb it from Netflix.
>> Throughout my whole like, you know,
quote unquote career as a climber, I
basically have never worried about money
and I've always just tried to do the
thing and let it all play out at the
end. And so I've done a ton of work for
free over the years. Oh, like actually
we were talking about that Halfdme film
earlier where it's like I'm shuffling
along. It's like I did that film for
free. I did tons of films like that for
free. Uh just because you're kind of
like, "Oh, it's part of being a
professional climber and I get to go
climbing and I'm up with my friends
filming on a thing." You're just like,
"You're working for free. It's fine."
But by doing all that stuff for free,
like I never I never stress the day
rate. Never, you know, I was like, I
don't need to get paid to go have fun
with my friends on a wall. Like it's
fine. But as a result of that film, you
know, a year or two later, they wind up
doing a photo shoot out there for the
cover of National Geographic. And so you
just wind up in other things and then
and then that got seen and I wound up
being profiled by 60 Minutes, which
actually was one of the first sort of
career inflection points. It was like
the 60 Minutes profile in 2011 or
something. But basically, I've done a
ton of work for free over my life as all
part of like it's all part of the game
and I just love playing the game. And so
you just like let it play out. And it's
funny because with this building, a lot
of people thought that I was sort of
underpaid by it, but afterward,
you know, some people have approached me
about some bonuses and some other work
stuff and like basically a lot has
already sort of happened and it's only
been a couple weeks since the building.
And I'm kind of like, you know, you
don't need to get paid for the thing
itself cuz it always works basically.
I'm kind of like I don't know. I'm like,
don't get hung up on how much you get
paid. Just do the thing. Make sure it's
freaking rad and it all sorts itself
out.
Yeah. Yeah. That I mean that's also been
like um the that's completely true for
my life as well. Even this podcast like
when we started the podcast in my
kitchen I mean this is a replica of my
kitchen and Jack was here. There was no
pay there was no payment when we started
it.
>> You're just doing a thing. You make it
as good as you can and eventually it all
sort of works and you're like cool.
>> I've I because that that pattern you've
just described has played out for 15
years of my life. I now and again my my
CFO and my commercial director might not
love me saying this but they know this
about me is and we even talked about it
recently with a particular project is
like don't let the inability to see
where the money is going to come from in
the near term stop you pursuing
something that you think is going to
create value because history shows that
actually value like giving value out
into the world precedes
the the e the economics totally. And so
if it happened 15 years of my life where
I remember when I started the social
media business and people some a guy sat
me down in Google in London and
explained to me why I would never make
money from that business. He like he did
the math for me and the math was solid.
>> He was like if you do once a day you
won't make any money. And I was like
>> you're like yeah but I don't think
that's true. You know you're like
>> and you have no evidence but
>> yeah but you just know it's going to
work.
>> Yeah. The Uber CEO sat here with me
yesterday in that scene and he was
telling me he was like the thing is
there's this thing called Jevans paradox
where when yeah when become more
efficient whatever people think of
things in linear progression but
actually there's exponential
progression. So when we launched Uber
more people started taking taxis. So all
of the models about how big this market
were were all wrong. And I find the same
in that and I found the same in about 5
years ago was yeah like you set me down
and go well Steve CPMs you're going to
have to be getting a million downloads
to make like to earn a living like but
>> like wait and see.
>> Yeah thing and let it let it happen.
>> I mean you're a prime example of that.
>> Yeah. It's always better to focus your
energy on being the best at the thing
that you're trying to do than figuring
out how to monetize it or you know make
money off of it. It's like I don't know.
I mean, my whole like life as a climber,
I've always tried to focus on like how
do you send, which in climbing terms
means like do the hard thing. Like you
always focus on sending and then
everything else follows.
>> Whoa. What's that on your face?
>> This is my Bon Charge face mask. I've
been wearing this for some time now.
They're a sponsor of the podcast. I put
this on for 15 20 minutes a day. I can
sit here in the chair and wear it.
Boosts my collagen production. helps
with fine lines, blemishes, my
complexion gets better, and then people
more people listen to podcasts cuz I I
look better. Professionalgrade equipment
in such a small box. It's noninvasive.
And having sat here with so many of the
world's leading health professionals,
there's various things that I repeatedly
hear work and some things I'm a bit
skeptical about. This is one of the
things that almost all of my guests on
this show have confirmed works. It is
really, really, really effective. And
they offer fast, free shipping worldwide
with easy returns and exchanges. And
you'll also get a one-year warranty on
all of their products. And they're HSA
and FSA eligible, giving you taxfree
savings up to 40%. And you can get 20%
off when you order through my link at
bondcharge.com/doac.
That's bondcharge.com/doac.
The deal applies sitewide. I've had so
many founders speak to me and say, "Why
didn't this particular ad that I ran on
this platform work for me?" Maybe the
copy wasn't good. the creative wasn't
strong, but usually the problem is
they're not having the right
conversation because that ad never
reached the right person. And if you're
in B2B marketing, that is much of the
game. And this is where LinkedIn ads
solves that problem for you. Their
targeting is ridiculously specific. You
can target by job title, seniority,
company size, industry, and even
someone's skill set. And their network
includes over a billion professionals.
About 130 million of them are decision
makers. So, when you use LinkedIn ads,
you're putting your brand in front of
the right people. And LinkedIn ads also
drive the highest B2B return on ad spend
across all ad networks in my experience.
If you want to give them a try, head
over to linkedin.com/diary.
And when you spend $250 on your first
LinkedIn ads campaign, you'll get an
extra $250 credit from me for the next
one. That's linkedin.com/diary.
Terms and conditions apply.
It's funny you you talking about
mortality earlier on and um I think in
the last couple of years my mortality
like realizing that I'm going to die
someday has been such a a wonderful
thing to to really remind myself of and
like a frequent basis.
>> What uh how come?
>> Just because Okay, so there's many
things. One of them is um
the whole idea of like sunk cost bias
where you become successful at a thing
and you and now you have something to
lose. So people go into a state of loss
aversion where they start to protect
what they have. Totally.
>> And this narrows your life in a way
where you stop taking challenges, stop
taking risks, stop doing new things.
>> And the other thing generally about
knowing you're going to die and really
like reminding yourself of that is it
liberates you from getting caught up and
worrying about things that in the grand
scheme of like cosmic reality are like
totally inconsequential.
>> Yeah.
>> I was I was hearing someone say the
other day like do you know the the name
of your great-grandfather?
>> Do you know do you know his first name?
>> Not really. And do you know the life
they lived and what they were worried
about and how they were embarrassed and
their shame.
>> Yeah. Exactly. No, you don't know any of
that.
>> And the point is like if you don't even
know your own family's
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Like nobody else cares. Yeah.
>> But even like extremely famous people a
couple of weeks after they trend on
Twitter and then a week later everyone
just like gets on with their life again.
>> Totally. Well, I'm already experiencing
that with with this stuff, you know,
like the building was like insane for a
moment, but now it's the Olympics and
there's a lot going on in the news cycle
and it's like the world's moved on. I'm
like great. I'll go back to just like
being at home with my family and
climbing as much as I can.
>> Being at home with your family, you said
earlier that when you're in that van for
10 years, you wanted a girlfriend.
>> Yeah.
>> Now, I'm not being funny, but people
that fit your profile and uh to some
degree, people that fit my profile
struggle in intimate relationships for a
variety of reasons. And I think I
actually saw this in the documentary
when I watched Free Solo. I saw you had
a partner at the time. There was an
accident on the cliff side where you
fell and she was supposed to be
protecting you.
>> Mhm. [clears throat] And generally I
just saw someone who probably is more on
the um less affectionate, more
commitment avoidant side of life. Is
that accurate?
>> I don't know about commitment avoidant
because actually I have had long-term
girlfriends and things but but yeah,
definitely I'm like less expressive. I'm
less emotionally intelligent than my
wife.
>> Has she ever given you feedback that she
wishes you were more emotionally
uh available? I mean, I get that.
>> I mean, yeah. Yeah. in in different
words perhaps, but yeah, basically
>> Sonnie.
>> Yeah, Sonnie
>> is her name.
>> She wrote a letter.
>> Oh gosh,
>> that's funny because the first two words
are, "Oh gosh, an intimate letter out
loud."
>> Oh gosh, [laughter] she she does know
me.
>> Obviously, this is your worst nightmare,
she said.
>> That's She knows me so well.
>> But we all have to do scary things
sometimes, Alex.
>> Ah, my coach.
She said, "I remember when you read a
book once about a woman who said she was
less affected by emotions than most
people. For her entire life, people
tried to convince her that she was
wrong, that she was suppressing her
feelings, but at the end of the day, she
just wasn't." As you were reading, you
turned to me and said something similar,
something like, "Everyone wants to
believe that I'm burying all these
things, these feelings deep inside, but
I'm just not." And I laughed and I
joked, "Don't worry. I know you're dead
inside. If I remember correctly, you
gave me a hug. But I've thought about
this conversation a lot because as the
person married to you, I spend a lot of
time trying to understand you. And while
there obviously are emotions that drive
you, I was mostly joking about the dead
inside part. I do think you are far less
affected by some feelings like anxiety,
fear, shame, guilt, or self-doubt than
many of us. But the longer I know you,
the more I see an ocean of something
else hiding beneath the surface. Filling
the space that would normally be taken
up by all these feelings is the ability
to truly see things. You move through
the world like a hawk while the rest of
us are lost in thought. As a climber,
you can see the way up a rock face, the
climbability of a building, or the
layered history of a mountain range. As
a father, you notice the quiet intrinsic
desires of your daughters or the chores
that need doing around the house. And as
a friend, you see the raw potential in
every person that you meet. Sometimes
this is the hardest thing about you.
Nothing goes unnoticed. Neither the
strengths nor the weaknesses, the
moments of dedication or the moments of
laziness. You are practical and blunt in
your assessment of your choices and our
lives. But that's also because you see
us. And paying attention is love. Your
ability to see the world so clearly
allows you to also appreciate it more
clearly. And that is a special form of
your love. Perhaps there's a well of
emotion in there after all. But but for
the purposes of this letter, Alex, I
want to give you your gift back to you
and tell you what what I see
particularly in the last four years
since we had kids because I think the
way you move through the world with us
is a unique love story. I see you
rushing down the trail from the climbing
area so you can get back in time for
dinner with me and the girls. I see you
flying the red eye so you can be home a
day sooner. I see you cramming in your
gym session even when you have a huge
goal on the horizon so that I have time
for my workout too. I see you pushing
your body to the absolute limit during
the day but still managing to stay awake
long enough to chat to me at night. I
see you taking on an extra day of travel
just to convince someone with money to
donate to your foundation and help save
the planet. I see you adjusting your
whole training schedule for work
opportunities in order to provide a
wonderful life for me and the girls. I
see the insane juggling act you do every
day to not only be a great athlete, but
a great dad and husband. I know it's not
easy, but I see it and I appreciate it.
We love you as you are, Alex. Not overly
emotional, but present, committed, and
always seeing what others miss.
Yours,
Sani,
she is very astute. I was like that's
I was like that's why I married her you
know
she is very astute.
Yeah.
I learned a lot about you from reading
this.
>> H what do you think?
>> You know we all show our love in
different ways and sometimes I think the
conventional way that the world tries to
measure love is through the like verbal
expression of it and romantic gestures
and those kinds of things. But there's
another type of person who often
struggles, I think, in in what life's
expectations of what love looks like,
who show it through acts of service.
That was that was literally one of our
last big arguments about something like
in bed the other night, not like a total
blowout, but basically she was sort of
like, I just need more, you know, of the
verbal kind. And I was kind of like, I'm
literally doing all the things. And I
always sort of say, you know, actions
speak louder than words. I'm kind of
like, if you're doing all the things,
you're doing the correct things. you
don't need to talk about them because
you're doing the things, you know, and
that was basically a a back and forth. I
mean, you know, I took her point that
like occasionally you have to say the
right thing, too.
>> Well, I have the same the same argument
on repeat with my fiance.
>> H she needs the words, too.
>> Yeah. She has like a different language.
She's speaking Spanish. I'm speaking
French.
>> Yeah.
>> And also, by the way, I have to say at
some deep level, again, because of my
early context where like you, I wished
my parents would break up. I wish they
would just get a divorce because the
model of love I saw was not a happy one.
I think at some deep level I have a
commitment problem or an intimacy
problem where
>> even growing up say calling someone my
best friend somewhat made me cringe.
>> Like saying saying affectionate words to
someone at some deep level made me feel
deeply uncomfortable
>> and so you can imagine me being ding and
then I think like often times we go for
the opposite in the person we end up mar
like marrying or
>> Yeah. Certainly for me. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Well certainly.
>> Yeah. My wife is like way more
emotionally intelligent than anyone in
my entire extended family.
>> Yeah, same.
>> This is how you build a rich life is
that you basically like I mean it's like
hiring. You find members of the team who
have all the strengths that you need and
it's like the things that you can't do
and
>> it's like filling your blind spots
basically.
>> Have you got better at saying the words?
>> No.
>> Any progress?
>> Uh yeah, progress probably. But very
slow. But in a way that's great, you
know, because we're going to be married
the rest of our lives and so that could
be another 50 60 years together. And so
you need to see incremental progress,
you know, because really there's nothing
better in life than making progress. And
I've started at such a low point and I'm
making progress so slowly that I
basically have a good project for the
rest of my life. Oh, um, we kind of
touched on it before, but one of the
things that's been in front of mind for
me at the moment is, um, actually
something I saw in your personality
test, which was you were high in
perseverance.
And, uh, we talked earlier on about like
mastery and how it's important to, um,
persist to get good at something. But
this has just been front of mind for me
I think for a long time because even
like as a podcaster I realize that a lot
of the game I'm like five years in now
and um when I look at someone like Joe
Rogan he's been going for like I don't
know 15 17 years
>> or more
>> and I go like so much of the game in
becoming great at something grinding
it's just going unusual amount of
>> it's like compounding interest. I'm like
look at Warren Buffett. Have you ever
seen stuff with Warren Buffett where
it's like, you know, it took him
whatever 40 years to make his first
couple million or whatever, took him
another like 10 or 15 years to make his
first billion and then it took him like
whatever in the last eight years he's
made like hundred billion dollars, you
know, cuz his whole wealth is like woo.
>> You're kind of like basically if you put
enough time into something and you let
it compound, it like slowly gets bigger
and bigger.
>> It's exactly that. And so I've been
thinking about like
>> So all those numbers are incorrect, but
the the shape of the graph is correct.
>> We'll put it on the screen so everyone
can see.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. [laughter] Somebody
correct my numbers. The principle is
correct.
>> It's the same. It's the same as this
graph here that you drew of your career.
>> Um it's the same as the podcast growth
where three years no one was listening
and then we have this
>> Yeah.
>> Um and I I think as a principle
>> that's why you focus on doing something
of value because with the podcast like
if you feel like you're doing something
useful and that you think is cool and
you think there's something there you
just keep doing it and eventually people
get on board.
>> Okay. So
on that train of thought, I've thought a
lot about how do I create the conditions
to outpersist other people in the areas
that I love. And one such thing, for
example, with a podcast is like never
have a conversation that I'm not looking
forward to
>> because that's unsustainable over the
long term.
>> Totally. Cuz then it feels like hard
work as opposed to something like this
is amazing.
>> Yeah. So when I look at my they'll say,
oh this person wants to come and they've
got 160 gazillion followers.
>> But you're like I don't care about that
person.
>> Yeah. Because if I if I use that as a
decision framework for the next 10
years, I'll quit.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you think about that like the
conditions to out persist in your
domain?
>> I mean, kind of. Yeah. I mean, I haven't
had to think about it too much because I
freaking love climbing in all its forms.
And so, basically, climbing comes
easily, but like in terms of the work
stuff I do, um I forget I think I was
talking to you before we started
recording, but um but I host this
podcast called Planet Visionaries. Uh
it's like a Rolex Perpetual Planet. Like
I interview scientists and
conservationists and whatever. And for
whatever reason, every time I do those
podcasts, I come out of it feeling all
energized and like, I should train more.
I should study. I should learn
something. Basically, because the people
that I'm interviewing are all so
uniquely good at what they do, and
they're all trying to save the world in
different ways. It's like, you know,
marine biologists like exploring the
deep sea floor and things like that.
Yesterday, I interviewed these two uh
women about the fact that we've only
explored .001% of the deep sea, which
represents twothirds of the planet. So,
basically, twothirds of the planet we
know like literally nothing about. And
there's like this rich underwater
world of like cool stuff going on in the
ocean floor that we've never seen and
know nothing about and it's insane. I
was like that's so cool. And I got all
fired up about it. And so I come out of
work thing, you know, quote unquote work
things like that and I'm like energized
and excited to learn and grow, you know,
push myself and I'm kind of like that's
the type of work that I want to do as
much as possible. And then there are
other kinds of things where you know
I'll do like corporate speaking or
something where you show up at a
conference and you just like get ground
down you know when you leave and you go
back to your hotel and all you can do is
just like lie there on the bed for an
hour being like h what am I doing with
my life you know you feel like kind of
wrecked.
>> So it's like if you can focus on the
work where you come out of it feeling
inspired and like excited to try hard
versus the work that makes you want to
like mindlessly scroll on something for
hours. You know what I mean? Cuz
sometimes you're just like oh I'm just
so over it.
>> Yeah. Someone said that to me in my
career. I said like whenever you find
domains that make you feel expansive
like
>> totally
>> you should double down on those domains
cuz you're that's the path to mastery.
You're going to be able to continue.
>> Yeah. Because you can just keep pushing
super hard in that
>> thankfully for climbing that's always
just been that like I just freaking love
climbing. It's so great. You should do
it more.
>> I know you you make us all want to climb
more, Alex.
>> That's one of the I think the great um
consequences of watching you do
something like Taipei. I mean, there was
loads of kids in the streets of Taipei,
I think, that were all trying to climb
buildings. There was loads of like funny
videos. Then, obviously, they were only
getting like a meter up before they
fell.
>> I was like, hopefully they don't Yeah,
hopefully it's not too much copycatting,
but yeah, we got some crazy numbers from
Netflix that I think half of people or
more than half of people who have a
Netflix subscription in in Taiwan
watched the building climb on uh it's
like in in Taiwan, it was like insane.
Like, literally everybody watch. It's
it's such a it's such a singular
striking building in in Taipei. It's
like a total national icon, you know?
It's like a it's it's insane.
>> Have you already started thinking about
what you're going to do next?
>> People are always like, you know, what's
your next big thing? And I'm kind of
like, you know, if you just focus on
doing lots of little things all the
time, occasionally the big things just
happen and you can't totally know ahead
of time. You know what I mean?
>> That's me.
>> Well, so at least, so I mean, I have
climbing goals going back 20 years. I
have all these notes on my phone. I
always have like to-do lists. of
especially when I lived in the van and I
was traveling, you're like seasonally
moving between climbing destinations
non-stop. So I'd lay I'd layer out all
these different types of goals. Like I
want to do these types of things.
Certain goals lead to other goals
because they're same type of fitness,
let's say. So like doing really big
things help you do even bigger things
later, but doing like really hard and
intense things help you do other hard
and intense things later, you know? So
in some ways in the way you stack your
goals, you can kind of build up to big
things or like build up to really hard
things or whatever. And so I've always
had running to-do lists of like I'm
going to try to do all these climbs this
year. And realistically, I normally do
like half of them or or some of them I
never even get to because it's like the
weather's not good. I wind up going to a
different area or I like don't go to
that that climbing destination at all.
And so I never even try the project. But
I've always had tons of goals like that.
And looking back at years and years of
that type of those types of lists, I
just see that it's slightly hard to
predict when you're going to achieve the
things that are like cutting edge or
groundbreaking or whatever. You just
have to keep doing the things non-stop
and every once in a while some of them
rise to the top. I mean, this kind of
goes back to the same like value
creating things like you don't know
which things are going to be rad. You
just do all the things and some of them
wind up being rad.
>> And the decision framework there is to
just do things you love and that
challenge you.
>> Yeah. things that push you in a like
things that are new for you that are
hard for you that are challenging in the
right ways, you know, but you just can't
you don't always know ahead of time
which of those things are going to stand
out or not, but you just do them anyway
because you're learning from them,
you're excited about them, they're hard
and then, you know, some are cool, some
aren't. Some you never even try and like
that's fine. You just keep doing things.
the CEO of Uber, Dario, was was sat
there yesterday and one of the um
contrarian pieces of life advice he
gave, which is kind of overlaid with
what you just said, is he said people
need to stop making young people in
particular need to stop making life life
plans
>> because it narrows them to the
serendipity and opportunity and things
that might happen if they're broad and
openminded.
>> Well, or um uh my wife and I sometimes
joke it's that we both have very strong
opinions loosely held where it's like,
"Oh, I'm totally sure of a thing right
up until I get some data that shows that
that's wrong." And then you're like,
"Oh, never mind. throw that away. And
that's kind of how a lot of my to-do
lists have always been or like my goals
where I'm like, "Oh, I have all these
goals." But if I take a slight fork in
my year where it's like turns out, uh,
you know, for whatever reason, like
something else lines up and it makes
sense to do all these other things and
I'm just like right turn and just
change.
>> Mhm.
>> You know,
>> and it overlaps with what you said
earlier about like not worrying so much
about like how much it's going to pay me
today or what the big thing is or
>> it's kind of like just just keep doing
cool things. It'll it'll all work out. I
would love if we could, you know, scan
your brain and look at all the parts.
It's especially in the context I learned
of about this particular region of the
brain called the anterior mid-sulate
cortex.
>> Okay.
>> Which I heard Andrew Hman been talking
about. And it's a part of the brain they
discovered quite recently that lights up
when you do things that you don't want
to do.
>> So not things that you enjoy doing that
are somewhat like difficult like running
a marathon, but things that you actively
avoid and resist but do anyway. Pain,
fear, effort, discipline. This is the
circuit that decides whether you quit or
you push through. And it grows the more
you do things you don't want to do. So
it's like they now consider it to be the
muscle of willpower in the brain. When
they look at athletes, they have bigger
ones. When they look at people who are
>> struggling or less are more sedentary or
struggling with their weight, they often
have smaller ones. Anyone that avoids
discomfort has a smaller one.
>> So um
in your in the context of the way you've
lived your life, you've continued to do
things that are hard. I mean, you can
love climbing, but you don't necessarily
love
>> Yeah. But just doing like one more set
every time is like that's that's always
a challenge. You're always like my whole
body hurts but I'll just do a little
more, you know?
>> Yeah. And I think the thing I guess here
is like about neuroplasticity which
there's going to be a ton of people
listening right now that are so far away
from their type A
>> from their type A 101. They're so far
away from that. They're in a job they
just don't like. They're maybe the
finance bra that you know you talked
about a second ago and their life is
absent of ad adventure and they probably
look at you and go well you know he just
has something I don't have. I know, but
I just don't, you know, I mean, I've
structured my life in a different way
and I've made many different choices and
and all that, but that's the thing is I
don't really think I have anything
different. I mean, I I actually hate all
the like brain stuff because people
always like use that to to put me in
this box of like, well, you're
different. And I'm like, well, not
really. Like, I'm a middle class
suburban kid. Both my parents like
nobody in my family is athletic. Like,
nobody is good at sports at all. You
know, it's like like basically if you
were to like look at the, you know, like
if I was a video game character and you
were to look at all my little bars,
you'd be like, "That guy's not going to
be an athlete. Like he's not good at
this." You know, it's like my parents
professors and we freaking read books.
Like I'm not there's no aptitude for
anything really.
>> And I was like bad at sports as a kid.
I'm not good with balls. Like, you know,
there's no reason. But I mean, really, I
just have loved climbing enough that
I've been willing to put in a tremendous
amount of time and effort and eventually
get good at it. And I'm kind of like to
hear people say like, "Oh, your brain's
different." You're kind of like, "Well,
everybody's brain is a little bit
different in some ways." It doesn't mean
that you can't devote yourself to
something that you care about. But with
this in mind, and with all the
neuroscientists that I've interviewed,
your brain is different in part because
you've taken you've done different
things. And neuroplasticity says you can
change your brain right the way up
throughout your your entire life. One of
my friends, um, Tom Bilu is a good
example of that. He's a big podcaster.
You might know Tom Bilu. Um, but he, you
know, he was, I can't remember the rough
age, but I'm going to say he was 30
years old. He was so, in his words, lazy
that he would lay in bed all day. When
his girlfriend came home, he said he
would jump up out of bed just so she
didn't believe that he was in bed all
day. And he didn't want to be
embarrassed. And when he asked his at
the time girlfriend if if he could um
asked her dad if he could marry her, dad
said no. He was he just he was like lazy
down and out. Over the next 10 years, he
makes decisions to take on more
difficult challenges, builds a billion
dollar company, sells it. If you meet
this guy today, you'd think like
athlete, genius, super smart, motivated.
You'd beg him for advice on discipline
and motivation. Like he's that kind of
guy.
>> What? Yeah. So, what did he do?
>> He read a book about neuroplasticity and
he realized that he wasn't stuck.
>> He he learned about neuroplasticity,
which means that at any age in your
life, the decisions you make change your
brain. And that's why I love this
discovery of this anterior mid-syncular
cortex because it means that like maybe
in part the reason why I'm not taking on
my type A 101 is because I haven't taken
on my type A 101.
>> Yeah. You have well you haven't taken on
uh your type A1. You know your type A
your type A 12 or whatever. you know,
like just the little pieces at the
bottom. Cuz that's the thing is like and
and actually this is why when you ask
about like any big goals, I'm like I I
sometimes I think the big goals are
slightly limiting because like if you're
your friend who's laying in bed, typo
101 is not the appropriate goal. You
know what I mean? Like you need you need
to type a four. Like you need to just
get out and like do a little thing. You
need to achieve some success. you need
to see that you can do something and you
need to take on appropriately sized
challenges because I think having a
great white whale, you know, is is great
sometimes, but that's not always what
you need, you know,
>> and and partially like for me right now,
you know, we're raising two little kids
and we're just like in the midst of it,
you know, it's like bedtime right now is
hanging. It's just like it's a lot. And
I'm like, I don't need like an LC
capsized goal right now because, you
know, we're just trying to make it
through a certain phase of life really.
Not to say that I'll never have other
big goals, but you're kind of like you
you want your goals to be appropriate to
the the time and and and space that you
have available.
>> I had a psychologist say to me about
this idea of just setting yourself a
type A1, like a small goal. The reason
why people don't do it is because they
see it as almost so embarrassingly small
that they don't think it matters.
>> Yeah. But I mean, but that's why you
focus on it doesn't matter to you. Like
is it something that you haven't done?
Like is it good for your growth? Is it
challenging for you? like it's good
enough.
>> But that same psychologist told me that
when they were dealing with a patient
who was so demotivated um that they
couldn't get out of their bedroom which
was stacked to the ceiling with plates
and cutlery that day one was bringing
the Hoover into the room. That was day
one. Day two was plugging it in. That
was day two. And by day 30 they're
outside. This is someone who was scared
of going outside. They're outside
walking around. The room is clean. But
he he said to me that people don't take
that first step because it's so
embarrassingly small that it's almost
shameful to say like today we're just
going to bring the Hoover in. Yeah, but
that's the thing is it's always better
to take a step than to not take a step,
>> you know? That's Yeah. I mean, that's
how I've always felt with with all these
things. You're like, well, you might as
well go out and do the thing. Like, do
something.
You remember at the beginning I was
like, you don't let perfect be the enemy
of good. Like, you do the good thing,
[clears throat] you know, cuz it like
it's like don't let perfectionism
you, you know? It's like that's
why I think you know Taipe A 101 if
that's kind of like your perfect goal.
It's like don't let that hold you back
from going out and climbing Taipe A 4 or
Type A or you know like some of the
surrounding little buildings because
it's like you practice on what you can.
Goes back to this point of perseverance.
I read a quote many years ago that said
um greatness doesn't exist. Greatness is
just good repeated.
>> I mean this is what I'm saying about
having lots of little goals is that I
would actually say that if you repeat
good enough every once in a while some
of those are great actually but you just
don't totally know. You know, I noticed
that a lot like in my climbing life,
like in the long arc of climbing, there
are tons of things I did in use where
like in a season I'd have like five or
six goals in use and I'd do all the
things and one of them [clears throat]
for whatever reason would wind up being
like that's rad and it would, you know,
like makes climbing news and things like
that. And the other ones, you know,
maybe less so, but you don't totally
know ahead of time which ones are cool
or not and which ones are going to stand
the test of time.
At one point in the not too distant
past, I held a speed record on every
major formation in use. Now a few of
them have been broken over time and but
those are the kinds of things where you
never really know like how long those
types of records will last cuz sometimes
you do them and then your friend comes
and breaks it the next season and you're
like cool and you go back and forth and
it's all part of a fun game and then
some of them you set a speed record and
it lasts for like 15 years and you're
sort of like oh I didn't realize that
this was going to be like such a
milestone. You know,
>> it reminds [snorts] me of um the Steve
Jobs quote about how you can only really
connect the dots looking backwards in a
>> Totally. Totally.
>> Steve Jobs quote from his commencement
speech was, "You can't connect the dots
looking forward. You can only connect
them looking backwards." So, you have to
trust that the dots will somehow connect
in your future. Clarity isn't a
prerequisite for action. It's the reward
you get after you move. And that's
that's the thing I think cuz I do so
many interviews like, you know, when was
the moment you decided to be a
professional climber? And I'm like,
there's no moment. Like, I just did the
thing for years and years. And now
looking backward, it looks like this
amazing arc, you know, but at the moment
you're always, you know, I spent years
being like, should I go back to college?
Like, do I need a degree? Like, and then
I spent a few years wondering if I
should go back and get like an executive
MBA or something or something because I
was like, I don't want to go back to
undergrad. I've been living in my van
for 10 years. And but you're kind of
like still, I need that validation. I
need, you know, I want to jump through
the hoops. And then really, it's only
now that I'm kind of like, I don't think
I need that. In part, I think the reason
why we um we so many of us get forced
into procrastination when we're trying
to connect the dots looking forward is
because we face these questions from
society which is like what's your plan?
What's your career? What are you aiming
at? And we don't have answers. So, we
fill in the gaps. We have to say
something to mom and dad. You have to
say like what's the plan for the future?
You can't say nothing. No plan.
>> Well, or you just say, "I'm living. I'm
just letting it play out. We'll just see
see what happens. It's going to be a
grand adventure." I don't know. I mean,
I kind of hope my my kids feel confident
with that, you know, just kind of like,
"Well, I'm doing the best I can. and I'm
practicing the things that I care about
and we'll see how it plays out.
>> We'll see how it plays out cuz like
either way it's going to play out with
with me and them and everybody else
dying. You're like, you know how it's
going to play out at the end end. And so
you're kind of like the whole space up
to there is like, oh, you just try to
fill it with as many things that you're
proud of as you can.
>> It's a remarkably simple way to live in
a world that's increasingly complex,
Alex. Hm. Well, I mean, it doesn't need
to be that complex,
but this is why I think spending some
time in nature like helps remind you of
some of those sorts of things. This
company that I've just invested in, it's
grown like crazy. I want to be the one
to tell you about it because I think
it's going to create such a huge
productivity advantage for you. Whisper
Flow is an app that you can get on your
computer and on your phone, on all your
devices, and it allows you to speak to
your technology. So, instead of me
writing out an email, I click one button
on my phone and I can just speak the
email into existence and it uses AI to
clean up what I was saying. And then
when I'm done, I just hit this one
button here and the whole email is
written for me. And it's saving me so
much time in a day because Whisper
learns how I write. So on WhatsApp, it
knows how I am a little bit more casual.
On email, a little bit more
professional. And also, there's this
really interesting thing they've just
done. I can create little phrases to
automatically do the work for me. I can
just say Jack's LinkedIn and it copies
Jack's LinkedIn profile for me because
it knows who Jack is in my life. This is
saving me a huge amount of time. This
company is growing like absolute crazy.
And this is why I invested in the
business and why they're now a sponsor
of this show. And Whisper Flow is
frankly becoming the worstkept secret in
business, productivity, and
entrepreneurship. Check it out now at
whisperflow spelled w i s p r l o w.ai/
Steven. It will be a game changer for
you. If you knew that you only had one
week left to live and this was the week
and you could only do one last climb,
you go back and recapture the record, go
do our cap again, I don't know, a
different building, you have one week
and assume you're sufficiently prepared
for whatever the climb would be. What
would what would
>> So I'm allowed to do like cutting edge
futuristic things.
>> Yeah.
>> Oh, well then I'm like I don't know. I
mean the Burrish like it'd be insane.
But um but no uh like the the free
triple in Euseite is like the three
biggest walls in Euseite. Uh
>> free triple
>> the so it's LCAP, Halfdme, and Mount
Watkins. Mount Watkins is kind of like a
halfdome sized wall that's further up
valley. So it was the three biggest
walls in Euseite. So Tommy Caldwell and
I have free climbed the triple. The two
of us did it together with ropes, but we
like climbed the whole thing. And then
I've soloed the triple. So I've done all
three with ropes by myself. It was like
18 or 19 hours or something of climbing.
Um, but it's never been free sololed.
Uh, I've freestolled Haft individually
and I've free sololed Alcap
individually. No one's ever free soloed
Watkins. But the idea of doing all three
in a day would be like I think totally
like next generation achievement. There
are certain things like that where I'm
sort of like if I was starting over, if
I was like an 18-year-old who was like
trying to make it as a professional
climber nowadays and had a higher level
of skill than I do now and, you know,
basically was like trying to do this
again. There things like that that would
be sort of like the obvious next
generation challenge. free solo, all
three in the same day.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I'd probably take uh well,
it take a bit under 24 hours probably.
>> What is your training regimen to these
days? Is it go rock climbing a lot
today? I did a little workout in the
hotel gym this morning.
>> Your hands are quite different. I was
They're quite big hands.
>> Well, that's I mean, you know, I think
like a stonemason just like grinding
away their whole life. I see you. You
have I don't know if people can see that
on camera, but you it does look like you
have very um
wide fingers.
>> Yeah, my fingers uh have taken a lot of
abuse in their time
>> cuz I see you like putting them in in
between walls.
>> Yeah, crack climbing. It's like you
basically put your fingers into a crack
and then you torque them. And so like
the side to side pulling uh does sort of
make your connective tissue bigger.
>> And does that hurt?
>> Yeah, it hurts.
>> It I was wondering when you're going
uphel when you're doing it well with
good technique, it it's not that
painful. Well, it depends on the type of
rock, but some rock is kind of sharp and
kind of painful. Um, but yeah, this is
this goes back to strengthening your
what's the part called in your brain?
>> Anterior midsular cortex.
>> Yeah, [laughter] exactly. That guy. I
mean, that's the thing is that even when
done well, climbing like it hurts your
fingers and toes, you know, crack
climbing when you're like jamming your
toes into a crack and you're torquing
them side to side and you're like
wedging your fingers in. I mean, when
you're doing it well, it has a pleasant
feel of safety to it cuz you can really
like lock into cracks and it feels
comfortable and you feel like you're
swimming and you're like, "This is
beautiful." But when you really come
down to the sensations, you're still
crushing your bones into a crack like a
Star Wars.
>> When I look at this kind of photo
>> where you're It looks like you're
hanging by one and a half hands.
>> Yeah.
>> And you're going to fall to your death
if you if your grip isn't
>> sufficient. It makes me think you must
have the world's greatest grip strength.
>> Uh I definitely don't.
>> I mean, well, you have your your grip
then. You can find out
>> what's below you there in this photo.
Well, actually, so there is like a
sloping cliff thing below me. Uh, so I'm
actually only like 30 ft off the ground,
but if or 40 ft, but if you fell, you'd
bounce off and you'd go, you know,
basically to where it looks like down in
the valley floor down there.
>> Terrifying photo.
>> It's funny, actually. Have you you
you've seen Free Solo?
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> Do you remember the the camera guy that
like can't look? Uh, the guy that's like
shooting the long shot on the ground,
Mikey. He's a really good friend of
mine. I've done tons of things with him.
He was he shot the Taipei clown as well.
Um, Mikey was the photo assistant for
this photo. He was like holding the
photos and he did the whole shoot just
like
>> looking into the wall. Like he just
never looked at any of the things
happening. Like Jimmy Chin was taking
the photo and Mikey was like did all the
the rigging and the lights and
everything and Mikey did the whole shoot
just like looking into his armpit like
looking the other way. He was like I am
not part of this.
>> I would like to see his brain scan.
>> He was stressed but he I mean he's an
elite climber himself and he's he's
amazing but like basically watching free
souling is stressful and nobody wants to
do it if they don't have to. When is in
all your career, when is the moment
where you were most scared? Where you
thought maybe you had pushed it too far?
>> Oh, it's actually uh I've had several
moments, but it's actually mostly with
ropes on. That's the thing is that
because when you're freestyling, you
generally keep it within a healthy
margin or you practice ahead of time,
you know, basically because you're going
to die. You make sure that you can do
it. But when you have a rope on, you're
way more willing to push into the
unknown because you're kind of like,
surely I'll get some protection
eventually. I'll just keep looking. I'll
keep looking. And so like I've had I was
on an expedition to Antarctica actually
um in 2017 and did a bunch of climbing
that was very extreme but like with a
rope but it was you know it's Antarctica
it's really freaking cold conditions are
challenging the rock is crumbling
everything is scary and you just keep
hoping that it's going to get better and
it just keeps getting worse instead and
eventually you're sort of like because
the thing is having a rope on doesn't
mean anything unless you get good
protection which means you have to be
able to put gear into the rock and if
you can't find places to put gear into
the rock then you can go you know the
rope is 200 feet If you go 200 feet
without getting good gear, then you're
looking at taking a 400t fall before the
rope catches you. Uh, which is almost
certainly fatal, you know. I mean, if
you fall that far, even though the rope
will catch your corpse, you know, but
you're still just going to hit the wall
after 400 ft, like you're screwed. So,
anyway, my scariest experiences have all
been situations like that for the most
part. This is why I'm saying climbing,
you get scared a lot.
And our like that expedition we were
climbing basically day on, day off. Each
day we would go climb one of these crazy
spires and we'd have these experiences
where I'd be like so scared and then the
next day we would just sit in the tent
because it's Antarctica. It's like
really cold. You're in the cook tent and
I would basically just spoon Nutella all
day totally shell shocked like totally
like just completely traumatized and
then the and then you'd be like rested
enough and you go out the next day and
do it again and we just did like day on
day off of like full trauma fear for the
whole trip and then we climbed
everything in the range. It was amazing.
It was an incredible trip.
>> So you do get scared?
>> Yeah, I was so scared the whole time.
Are there any techniques that are proven
to be effective for you to deal with
that fear? Like people talk about breath
work and
>> yeah, take some deep breaths, try to
compose yourself. I mean, I try to stay
rational, you know, like, am I in
danger? Cuz sometimes, like in this case
in Antarctica, I am actually in danger.
Like, if I fall, I could die. Um, but
often times you feel you get those
feelings of fear and you're not actually
in danger. You just it's your mind
running away from you. And so sometimes
you can sort of rationally re in a
little bit where you're like, "No, I am
safe. The protection will hold me. The
rope is, you know, my gear is good." And
then you just take a deep breath and you
just carry on.
>> And do you visualize falling ever?
>> Oh yeah. I mean of course. Yeah. I mean
you have to understand what the
consequences will be because I mean that
type of visualization is also how you
can know when you're safe because like
if you ever open gear and you're trying
to visualize like if I fall am I going
to hit the ground or is the gear going
to catch me before I hit the ground? I
mean there often situations like that
where you're like if I fall am I going
to hit that ledge and break both my legs
or am I going to clear the ledge and
fall into free space in which case it's
totally safe. And so it helps to be able
to have a cleareyed visualization of,
you know, because most people visualize
the worst case, like if I fall, I'm
going to die. And you're like, well,
often times if you I'm talking about
with the rope, if you fall, you're going
to be fine. But it's important to know
the difference.
>> So you don't avoid the confrontation
with the negative outcomes.
>> No, because you're trying to avoid the
negative out like you have to think
about it because how else do you
mitigate that kind of stuff,
>> but you can't let that stop you taking
actions when the risk profile is okay.
>> Yeah. Exactly. I mean, this is like a
whole rant about risk-taking and
everything, but like I mean, that's the
thing is you want to be taking the risks
that you want to take. And it drives me
crazy that nobody else thinks about risk
in this way because think of all the
people that like go out partying every
weekend and they get like kind of buzzed
and they drive home and whatever. And
it's like they're taking all kinds of
risk that they're not actually choosing
to take. You know what I mean? Like
they're just choosing to go out and
party and have a good time, but then
they're like driving a little buzzed and
they're like, "No, it's fine." But
you're like, "No, obviously you're
taking a risk." or like you're putting
yourself into situations where you're
like in a vulnerable situation because
you're incapacitated because you're
drunk or whatever. And so, you know,
you're putting yourself at higher risk
for crime, things like that. And so,
you're taking risks, you just haven't
chosen to take those risks. I'm kind of
like, the thing with climbing is that
I'm choosing to take the risks. And I'm
pretty cleareyed about the risk that I'm
taking. Like, I mean, I'm not going to
say it's perfect, but for the most part,
I think I have a pretty good idea of
which aspects are dangerous, like when
the consequences are high, what will
happen if I do fall. You know, it's like
you try to think it all out as much as
you can. And I'm kind of like, how many
people in normal life actually think
through all the risks that they're
taking? And even totally sedentary
people who are like, "Well, I don't take
risk. I stay home and I play video
games." You're like, "No, you're at a
much higher risk of heart disease. Like,
you're going to die from other things."
You know, it's like, and you're still
going to freaking die either way. That's
okay. I'm done ranting. I'm sorry.
>> No, no, but it's really important
because you I think we are all taking
risks, but some of us aren't intentional
about the risks we're taking
essentially.
>> Well, that's exactly it. Like, even if
you take no risk, you're going to die.
you're taking a different set of risks.
And so people look at my life and
they're like, "Well, you're crazy.
You're such a risk taker." And I'm kind
of like, "Well, at least I'm taking the
risks that I'm choosing and I'm choosing
them very intentionally and I'm pretty
careful about them and I mitigate them
as much as I can." I'm kind of like,
"Well, can you say the same for the risk
that you're taking or, you know, I'm
sort of like the average person, I
think, doesn't think about risk as much
as they should."
>> And is there anything that you would
give them as a framework to help them be
more intentional about those risks? Is
there is it just
>> Well, it's like you're going to freaking
die either way, so choose the things
that you care about and then do them
well.
and do them well. Prepare.
>> Yeah. Execute. Like have a plan, you
know, but don't just like take risk
willy-nilly. Like don't just get drunk
and go out and do a thing, you know, cuz
like that's stupid. Like that's not the
risk you should be taking, you know?
Like don't put all your money on black
and just like hope, you know what I
mean? Like basically don't just like
roll the dice. Like don't let fate just
like roll the roll the dice with your
life. Like make choices.
>> And free soloing is, you know, there's a
bigger existential risk with no margin
for error. But [clears throat] um
>> but it's very intentional.
>> Very intentional. Drinking as as a risk
is like a volume knob. The more you do
it, the more the risk increases.
>> And the other one is kind of like an
on-off switch, which you can you do it
today. And
>> yeah. So grip strength.
>> I wouldn't be even a little bit
surprised if you can pull that more than
I can actually, but I mean we'll both
try.
>> Okay. This is a grip strength meter.
>> Um okay, so let's see. We're at zero. Um
kilograms would be extra small then. Uh,
I mean, the thing with these like, okay,
actually, let me just preface this with
like I've had tons of people be like,
"Well, surely you're going to break the
machine." I'm like, "No, because for
climbing, you you just have the strength
that you need to do the things that
you're trying to do."
>> And how much do you weigh?
>> Um, right now like 165.
>> 165,
>> which is actually basically the heaviest
I've ever been. Maybe 163 if I'm lucky
right now.
>> So, 165 lbs in kg is equivocal to 75 kg
roughly.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay. Go ahead.
>> [clears throat]
>> 49 or 50 49.9
more. It's just like
Yeah, 49. You know,
>> those are just kind of like it's just a
it's just a different thing. You know
what I mean? Like that's not climbing.
>> 49 kg in pounds is
108. Interesting.
>> Yeah, let's see yours though. But yeah,
like I said,
>> different arms.
>> Uh it's about the same with both hands.
It should be
>> 62.
>> Yeah. See, there you go.
>> I can't lift my body weight. Like
>> I might be able to like Yeah, I mean I
might be able to muster a little more in
it, but
>> 63 on that one.
>> Let me try again.
>> But like I don't I don't think uh Do you
work out? Like you do weights and stuff?
I
>> I lift dumbbells, but I'm not doing
anything grippy. I curl and stuff, but I
don't do anything grippy.
>> I know. I'm at 50 and a half.
>> How many pull-ups can you do?
>> Don't know. But I can. Yesterday I did
uh I did a couple one- arms like uh like
Yeah, I basically pull-ups.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Which is very hard.
>> Yeah. I don't think I can do one arms.
>> Yeah. Well, that's the thing. That's why
grip strength stuff you're kind of like
nah. Or actually, so um like have you
done weighted pull-ups in a gym?
>> Weighted pull-ups? No, I just do I'll
just do my own body weight and I you
know I weigh a lot. So I'm like
deceptively heavy.
>> Really? Like
>> very dense?
>> Very dense. Cloat in water. No, like big
bones.
>> You just sink straight in the bottom.
How how much kilograms do you think I
weigh? I mean, in pounds, you'd know it.
But this is
>> Well, now I'm now I'm guessing. I don't
know. Like, now that you're saying that
you're big, I'm like I don't know, maybe
185 or something. What?
>> I'm 211.
>> Yeah. With actually So, that's another
thing with grip strength is like it
makes sense that your grip strength is
proportionally. I mean, you're like 25%
bigger than me.
>> Yeah.
>> Like, you know, basically.
>> So, it's like you would expect it to at
least 25% stronger right there just
because like if you can do body
weightight pull-ups, you're going to be
much stronger.
>> Yeah. Right.
>> We have um we have a closing tradition
on this podcast where the last guest
leaves a question for the next guest not
knowing who they're leaving it for.
>> And the question left for you is oh
what do you want to achieve in your life
outside of your mainline job that you
haven't yet achieved?
I don't know. I mean that seems there
basically two other avenues that I care
about in my life. Uh you know my family.
I want to be a good dad. I want to make
sure my kids grow up to be healthy,
welladjusted people that, you know, like
live their best lives. And then I have a
foundation that supports community solar
projects around the world. And I'd love
to see that thrive. I mean, basically, I
mean, you know, we give as much as we
can to to solar projects around the
world. And I'd love to see that do more.
>> On that point of your foundation, what
is what is the sort of the thesis there?
You want to for solar projects?
>> Yeah. Yeah. Solar it's basically energy
access around the world.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. I think now we've given I don't
know over 13 million to something like
over 100 partners around the world.
Basically like small scale community
solar projects. So people getting access
to energy for the first time. Um
basically using solar for anything
ranging from light to you know say food
refrigeration to pumping water. I mean
whatever whatever people need energy for
which is basically everything.
13 more than 13 million across 130
projects in 30 countries impacting
650,000 people and creating 1,200 plus
jobs protected 15 million acres of
biodiverse forest as well. Yeah, some of
those things are sort of like the the
secondary and tertiary benefits where
it's like when you empower certain kinds
of communities then they're better able
to take care of their lands and things
like that. Some of that has to do with
indigenous sovereignty and things like
in the Ecuadorian Amazon and and places
where it's like when the local people
have power suddenly they can protect
their land from illegal logging, illegal
mining, things like that. And so then
you wind up having this knockoff like
environmental benefit that's like also
great in addition to the human aspect
where you're like, well, these people
are living better lives and it helps
save the planet.
>> And you're giving away roughly a third
of your wealth to cover the majority of
the foundation's overheads. So yeah,
I've been given roughly a third of my of
what I make every year uh since 2012.
And uh that's basically just sort of
coincidentally tracked with the overhead
for the foundation. So it just means
that anything that people contribute
goes straight to projects because I
basically cover all the staffing and
everything. And
>> how does how does one contribute to
that?
>> Uh honoundation.org is the easiest way
you can support directly. I mean you can
see all the projects that we're working
with
>> and donors can go there if they want to
contribute to this. So they can go to
the website. Okay. Well, I'll link the
website below and if anyone is
interested in continuing to support the
great work you're doing there. Um I'd
highly recommend they go and make a
donation. It's a it's also just a way I
think to give back to you as a person
for the inspiration you've given so many
of us.
>> I appreciate that,
>> you know.
>> Yeah. I mean to me the foundation has
always been my attempt at doing
something useful cuz like I love rock
climbing. I think it's so fun. But in
the grand scheme of things it doesn't
really matter in the world. And I feel
like the work that we're doing through
the Han Foundation, at least material
improves the well-being of of other
humans, you know, like it actually has a
real impact both for the environment and
for people. Well, I don't know, Alex. I
I think watching you climb Taipei and
watching the millions of people all
around the world climb Taipei was an
expansive moment for all of us because
it all it holds a mirror up to us in a
really inspiring way and goes, "What
obstacles can you overcome in your
life?" And
>> um the many many millions of people now
have that visual and sometimes it is an
absurd visual that does that and it's
most memorable like it etched into their
brains and that means that they in their
own life are looking for their own type
A1 ones or type A7s or type A 101's and
if you play that forward as like a
ripple in the ocean of how people are
going to strive and maybe live more
intentionally maybe maybe it does really
really matter. maybe the whole
conversation which was like my entire
Twitter feed for days and days and days
of people saying this is a miraculous
human achievement
it there's like that's the first half of
a sentence the other half of that
sentence which we never really hear is
like so now what can I do mhm and that
[clears throat] is a profound thing well
that's definitely the best frame like
that's the framing that I hope for and
that's you know but I think that's like
the best case scenario for my climbing
and like I I hope that that's how people
take it but I will say that the work
through the hauntation at least has a
direct material impact immediately and
you're kind of like oh you don't have to
hope for ripples or anything. You're
like well this person can now read after
dark for the first time ever and you're
like that is gamechanging. If anything
you know I've been talking a lot about
like action speaking louder than words
and I'm like yeah I hope to you know
like it's great if the climbing I do
inspires people like that's all good but
at some point you just do a direct thing
that actually helps people's lives too.
>> And you're doing both.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Aspiring too. Doing my best.
>> The tangible and the intangible.
>> Alex, thank you so much. Thank you.
Amazing conversation.
>> Thank you.
>> YouTube have this new crazy algorithm
where they know exactly what video you
would like to watch next based on AI and
all of your viewing behavior. And the
algorithm says that this video is the
perfect video for you. It's different
for everybody looking right now. Check
this video out and I bet you you might
love